---
layout: page
title: "Example"
category: doc
date: 2020-03-23 16:23:14
---

**Hypothetical scenario**
<br /><br/>
You are the leading global expert on the human pathogen *Examploides randomii*. Diligent work by your lab has previously analyzed its outbreak in the United States of America (USA) in 1995. One week ago, you received a phone call from Mariana, an epidemiologist in Mexico. *E. randomii* is emerging in the the state of Yucatán. Mariana has been tracking the outbreak and is wondering if the emerging strain may be related to the 1995 outbreak in USA. She has sent you two clinical isolates of *E. randomii* overnight. You revived two clinical isolates from frozen stocks of the 1995 outbreak. You asked colleague, Kai, to sequence and compare the genomes of all of the isolate. In the meantime, you profiled the carbon substrate utilization of all isolates using Biolog Phenotype Microarray (PM) plates 1 and 2.
<br /><br/>
**Preparing your data for analysis**
<br /><br/>
You created a working directory in `/home/outbreaks/erandomii` and saved the result from your plate reader in `/home/outbreaks/erandomii/data`.
<br /><br/>
You also created the following table describing your files and saved it as the tab-delimited mapping file `/home/outbreaks/erandomii/mapping/meta.txt`
<br /><br />

|Plate_ID|Species|Strain|Isolate|PM|Replicate|
|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|
|ER1_PM1-1|E randomii|USA 1995|ER1|1|1|
|ER1_PM2-1|E randomii|USA 1995|ER1|2|1|
|ER2_PM1-1|E randomii|USA 1995|ER2|1|1|
|ER2_PM2-1|E randomii|USA 1995|ER2|2|1|
|ER3_PM1-1|E randomii|MEX 2020|ER3|1|1|
|ER3_PM2-1|E randomii|MEX 2020|ER3|2|1|
|ER4_PM1-1|E randomii|MEX 2020|ER4|1|1|
|ER4_PM2-1|E randomii|MEX 2020|ER4|2|1|

<br />
**Plotting your data**
<br /><br/>
You are curious about the quality of your results. Is the pathogen growing in at least some of the wells? Is the data noisy? Do you need to repeat any plates?
<br /><br/>
You downloaded `AMiGA` (see Installation) and made sure you are in the correct directory.

```bash
cd /home/programs/amiga
```

You can start analyzing your data by simply plotting the files.

```bash
python amiga.py -i /home/outbreaks/erandomii/ --only-plot-plates
```

You found the following files in your `figures` folders
<br /><br/>
`ER1_PM1-1.pdf`<br/>
`ER1_PM2-1.pdf`<br/>
`ER2_PM1-1.pdf`<br/>
`ER2_PM2-1.pdf`<br/>
`ER3_PM1-1.pdf`<br/>
`ER3_PM2-1.pdf`<br/>
`ER4_PM1-1.pdf`<br/>
`ER4_PM2-1.pdf`<br/>
<br/>
All figures look fine. The pathogen seems to be growing in some of the wells in each of the PM1 and PM2 plates. There are some minor difference that you can spot by eye between the Mexican and American isolates. But you will fit the growth curves first to confirm your observations.
<br /><br/>
**Fitting growth curves**
<br /><br/>
`python amiga.py -i /home/outbreaks/erandomii`
