---
layout: default
title: "Jekyll Docs Template"
---


#### What is AMiGA?

AMiGA is a python-based program for high-throughput analyis of microbial growth  data sets that are typically generated by multi-well plate readers. It applies Gaussian Process (GP<a></a>) inference to estimate microbial growth parameters such as maximum specific growth time, doubling time, lag phase, and carrying capacity. It is also the first growth curve-fitting program that can objectively detect and describe diauxic shifts in growth data. Finally, it is especially useful for the rapid analysis of Biolog Phenotypic Microarray (PM<a></a>) data.

#### Why use AMiGA?**

Many micorbial growth curves do not followed standard logistic or sigmoidal shapes. Gaussian Processes have recently been shown as a useful model for fitting these growth curves and inferring growth parameters (1,2<a></a>). AMiGA is the first program to analyze microbial growth data using GP inference in a user-friendly fashion. In order to plot or analyze the data, users simply interact with AMiGA using the command line by pointing to the file of interest. User can pass additional arguments or file or define program-specific parameters for more sophistiated analysis.

#### What can you do with AMiGA?**

AMiGA can do the following:
1. Plot the growth curves for 96-well plates.
2. Infer basic summary of growth curves such as maximum optical desnity \(i.e measurement at any time<a></a>) or fold-change relative to control well\(s<a></a>).
3. Infer growth curve kinetic parameters such as growth lag, maximum specific growth rate, doubling time, area under the curve.
4. Detect diauxic shifts and describe the time at which these shifts occur.
5. Perform hypothesis-driven statistical testing of the differences in microbial growth under different experimental conditions.

### Get Started

Start by [installing](/docs/_posts/installation.md) `AMiGA`.

```bash
ruby bin/jekyll-page "Some Page Title" ref bash
```
```zsh
ruby bin/jekyll-page "Some Page Title" ref zsh
```

#### Don't Forget

- Add your own content to this page (i.e. `index.md`) and change the `title`
- Change `title` and `subtitle` defined in `config.yml` for your site
- Set the `baseurl` in `_config.yml` for your repo if deploying to GitHub pages
